---
layout: post
title: "The MRI: The Next Generation"
date:   2019-12-06
categories: life
published: true
---

## A Technological Breakthrough

Magnetic Resonance Imaging, also known as magnetic resonance tomography, is a cross-sectional imaging technique using the electromagnetic property of elements to transform photons into three-dimensional images of tissues in the body (Straten, 2013). Based on the physics of the precessional movement of protons through the effect of a magnetic field, it is a versatile and useful imaging modality commonly used to image parts of the central nervous system and parts of the brain for scientific studies. It also has many medical uses, such as the assessment of tumours and tissue damage, or the diagnosis of cardiovascular or kidney diseases. Operated within rooms shielded of radio frequencies, patients wear a head coil and lie on a bed that carts through the large MRI unit through an opening. Assessments usually take between 10 minutes to an hour to complete depending on the tissue assessed (Filler, 2009). 

The invention of the MRI addressed the need for a scientific imaging device that is safe and produces detailed three-dimensional images and is applicable for many uses. This technology is more sensitive than x-ray spectroscopy and offers high resolution with more detail, and mitigates the risks of radiation as it relies on the process of electromagnetism. 

The MRI has presented many uses throughout the scientific community as well as the fields of healthcare. Primarily, it was designed as an efficient imaging technique to allow scientists to study the human brain and central nervous system (Hoyos & Kim, 2019). However, there were many other benefits and uses that came along with its discovery. MRI technology can scan through bone, assess the brain for tumours and probe body tissues and identify diseases or degeneration. For example, scientists can now visualize the underside of nerve coverings to help diagnose multiple sclerosis (Nowogrodzki, 2018). This technology pushes the limits of detail in medical imaging to the next level, from identification of clogged blood vessels to diagnosing heart, kidney, and liver diseases. Oncologists viewed the machine as a revolution as cancer cells can be identified easily, studied and examined in high resolution (Kakalios, 2017). 

Apart from laboratory uses that pave the path to more discoveries, it proved its practicality in the application of medical science and healthcare fields as detection of diseases in the human body can be performed more efficiently, which in the past required exploratory surgery to identify.

The MRI was developed from an earlier technology called Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), a process to determine the magnetic strengths of the nuclei of atoms. The discovery of this process takes place in the late 1930s by American scientist Isidor I. Rabi, who shot a beam of vaporized silver into a magnetic field. He noticed the nuclei of atoms, or more specifically, the protons of the atom behaved like a bar magnet (Filler, 2009). Each proton spun at a precise frequency, and their directions were reversed when the field applied specific frequencies. This phenomenon allowed for the measurement of atomic structure by using magnetic resonance frequencies of protons.

However, there were still flaws in the discovery, as vaporizing the samples destroyed them, and there was a lack of precision in radio frequency waves returned. These issues were solved following World War II through the work of physicists Felix Bloch and Edwards M. Purcell. Their discovery was significant as the NMR was now the most precise tool for imaging and studying molecules (Filler, 2009). 

Following the recognition of NMR and uses in scientific laboratories, American scientist Raymond V. Damadian applied this concept to living tissue. Chemist Richard R. Ernst modified the radio signals used, which made the technology more sensitive and allowed for better recordings, which paved the way for MRI development (Edelman, 2014). 
In 2003, Paul Lauterbur and Mansfield shared the Nobel Prize for medicine. They were awarded for the discovery of 2-dimensional image stacking through the utilization of magnetic field gradients recorded through NMR techniques  (Chang, 2007). Mansfield calculated the algorithm which analyzed MRI gradients mathematically. Through this advancement in NMR technology, the present-day MRI machine was born. 


##The Concept Behind the MRI

As a medical device that relies heavily on the assessment of the atomic structure of molecules and their magnetic resonance properties, the notion of connecting the laws of electromagnetism with the laws of atomic nuclear physics was heavily used. 

Each atom in our body has a distinct magnetic field due to different proton and neutron quantities in the nucleus. The goal of the MRI is to measure the strength of the magnetic fields of each atom in the body. This requires the measurement of the amount of energy needed to excite all protons to align in one direction and then flipping them (Kakalios, 2017). The MRI takes this concept and applies it through using a tube-like superconducting magnet, which generates a static electromagnetic field. As water molecules are located in every cell of the body, the magnetic field targets the fraction of hydrogen protons in water. When the field is applied, each proton spins its orientation so that it aligns with the field (Straten, 2013). 

Magnetic fields in the nuclei weaken when placed next to a powerful external field. Therefore, a minimal amount of energy applied can trigger a rotation of 180 degrees. Specific radio frequencies are set to release photons, which pass through the skin and inside the body. The photons are located on the lower side of the electromagnetic spectrum, and the nuclei will only absorb a photon if it precisely corresponds to the separation of their energy levels (Hoyos & Kim, 2019). This is why different radio frequencies will target different elements. The atoms that are opposed to the field then slowly realign to return to a lower energy state. This releases a radio wave photon back to the electromagnet, which contains coils that absorb this energy. Through collecting how many waves of radio frequencies were changed, the quantity and types of atoms in the body or tissue examined can be determined. Through the process of Fourier transformation, this information is mathematically calculated and computed into an image (Kakalios, 2017). 

Though the idea of measuring magnetic energy change in protons to determine an unknown sample seems simple, a deep understanding of electromagnetism is needed to develop clear and efficient images. For example, there was a minimal energy difference between the proton magnetically when aligned or opposed to the magnet (Hoyos & Kim, 2019). The understanding of the difference in energy levels of electromagnetic fields helped MRI devices harness this complication for image contrast. Taking a closer look, the nuclear magnetic field of protons have the lowest energy if they point in the same direction as the outside magnet, and they have the highest energy if they are aligned in the exact opposite of the magnet’s direction (Kakalios, 2017). Additionally, understanding the physics behind magnetic fields and resonance in atoms formed the notion behind how electromagnetic emission can trigger responses of magnetic nuclei. In return, photons are released and can be absorbed to form three-dimensional imaging.



##Pushing Imaging to New Limits

The MRI continues to be developed and improved, pushing internal human imaging to unprecedented levels of accuracy and precision. Through the use of MRI to further investigate unknown fields in science, more discoveries can be made. 

For example, neuroscientists developed an implantation needle that allows scientists to see brain physiology at levels so microscopic that in vivo measurements of blood oxygenation and flow in nanoliter volumes can be sampled (Handwerker, 2019). This invention is groundbreaking as even though MRI technology is versatile in probing brain physiology, it was never able to at such high levels of sensitivity and resolution. Through introducing a fusion of a mini NMR detector and a chip on an ultra-fine piece of needle, interference of magnetic resonance signals is immensely reduced. This example of a new technological innovation that arose from the MRI will allow for the discovery of new effects within neuronal activation. Furthermore, scalable solutions are now possible, hence using the same device, scientists can collect data from more than a single area. The complex physiological process can now be better understood, and issues stemming from neural signals and networks of the human brain can be investigated upon.

Other innovations stem from the constant improvement of the MRI machine to become more powerful. In 2018, the most potent MRI machine was built using a 10.5-tesla magnet, which is 50% more powerful than the strongest MRI signals approved for clinical use (Nowogrodzki, 2018). These ultra-high-field scanners increase the signal to noise ratio of radio frequencies during an assessment, allowing technology to resolve the details of the brain to as small as 0.5 mm, which was two times greater than the magnification 3T MRI machines provide. There are high neuroscience and clinical applications gains to this improvement. Clinicians can now guide electrons to more accurate degrees during treatments of using deep brain stimulation. Dr. Gregory Chang, a musculoskeletal radiologist at the New York University School of Medicine, used a 7T scanner to track sodium for changes that might foretell osteoarthritis. The evidence led him to conclude that “the sodium concentration in their cartilage goes down without any change in the structure of the cartilage,” which was a crucial discovery as now clinicians can diagnose earlier stages of the disease through the tracking of sodium concentrations (Nowogrodzki, 2018).

##Considering the Ethical Risks

Though MRI technology has a wide range of benefits in the scientific and medical fields, many implications arise through the use of this new technology. From an ethical perspective, there are concerns with the psychological and physical safety of patients or research participants. Additional limitations include the lack of accessibility for this technology for people due to the high cost or disability. A Canadian Research and Ethics Board investigation was performed on MRI technology to assess the risks of MRI research and use. Part of the study stated how participants could experience both anxiety and claustrophobia. The need for sedation to some participants for the reduction of body movement or the alleviation of stress can cause drowsiness, vomiting, respiratory depression, and possibly cardiac arrest (Marshall & Hadskis, 2009). A contrasting agent may be used to enhance image quality; however, some participants may have severe allergic reactions. These psychological risks, along with physical risks such as the attraction of ferromagnetic material in the environment or within the patient’s body, maybe pulled towards the magnet, which can cause severe injury or even death. These are possible dangers. However, it must be noted that any medical or scientific innovation entails some degree of risk.

Participants who have ferromagnetic implants such as aneurysm clips are unable to use this technology, as the magnetic sections can be torn from bodily tissue (Edelman, 2014). The magnetic objects can also heat up to extreme temperatures, which can lead to internal damage to the body. Finally, as the machine is highly expensive are rare as only large medical centers can purchase it. The high cost for regular maintenance and the need for a radiologist to supervise the process skyrockets the fees for a scan to be performed (Baker, 2010). Both the limitation of both ferromagnetic implants and costs may pose issues of inaccessibility for people of a particular class, for example, those who are disabled or impoverished. The inequality for access to this technology raises another ethical question. Should this technology be used for only the affluent, or should it be accessible for any person?

##A Miracle in Science and Healthcare

The MRI has been changing scientific and medical culture both on ethical and economic perspectives ever since its invention. From a scientific standpoint, it created a domino effect for many other inventions and discoveries, as it opened the doors to many new fields within neuroscience, allowing researchers to study the central nervous system with more precision (Khan Academy, n.d.). Many types of MRI’s were designed for different uses, including neuroimaging, cardiovascular, gastronomical, and many more. The diverse ways in which diseases and injuries could be scanned allowed doctors to help patients through diagnosing and for the detection of diseases at an earlier stage (Kakalios, 2017). For example, the MRI affected the field of oncology greatly as cancer was able to be determined before symptoms were even expressed, saving lives every day. Through significantly changing medicinal and scientific culture, this invention changed the way doctors and scientists diagnosed and viewed the human body. The Royal Swedish Academy shares this view while announcing the Nobel Prize to chemist Richard R. Ernst, a great contributor to the development of the MRI. They referred to the discovery of NMR spectroscopy and the invention of the MRI as “perhaps the most important instrumental measuring technique within chemistry.” (Brown, 2010).  Au contraire, it raises the polemic view of whether there should be equal opportunities and accessibility of new technology for every person in the world for disease diagnosis. Economically, it is a costly technology, and due to the increase in demand for production, medical billings for patients are high (Baker, 2010). Over the years, improvements in MRI manufacturing has decreased costs significantly. 

The MRI, a substantial scientific breakthrough and revolution in the field of healthcare, has demonstrated how the innovation of science and technology changes lives and culture. The application of known processes and theories to discover a new phenomenon, the constant invention of novel technology. From using the understanding of nuclear physics and electromagnetism, the MRI was made possible. Through manipulating atomic nuclei to absorb and re-emit radio frequencies under changes in magnetic fields, the imaging of internal structures and tissues of the human body was made possible with the absence of radiation. Building a track for future scientific innovations it allows humans to observe nanoscopic molecules and processes at another level. It also changes culture by allowing doctors to make crucial and life-saving diagnoses earlier. It can be evident that this instrument is one of the miracles and unimagined possibilities made existent through technological innovation by humans. Through the understanding of technology and physics, particularly electromagnetism, the MRI pushes for even more contrivances to come in the future and continuously shapes the culture of our society, while saving millions of lives every single day.




## References:

Baker, L. (2010). Acquisition Of MRI Equipment By Doctors Drives Up Imaging Use And Spending. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2009.1099

Brown, M. (2010). NMR: Nobel work if you can get it. The Royal Society of Chemistry. Retrieved from https://www.chemistryworld.com/news/nmr-nobel-work-if-you-can-get-it/3002947.article

Chang, K. (2007). Paul C. Lauterbur, 77, Dies; Won Nobel Prize for M.R.I.. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/28/obituaries/28lauterbur.html?_r=0%3E&mtrref=rad.washington.edu&gwh=5B53A4AB51B51A787C720D740DEF0220&gwt=pay&assetType=REGIWALL

Edelman, R. (2014). The History of MR Imaging as Seen through the Pages of Radiology. Retrieved from https://pubs.rsna.org/doi/full/10.1148/radiol.14140706

Filler, A. (2009). The History, Development and Impact of Computed Imaging in Neurological Diagnosis and Neurosurgery: CT, MRI, and DTI. Nat Prec (2009) doi:10.1038/npre.2009.3267.2

Handwerker et al. (2019) A CMOS NMR needle for probing brain physiology with high spatial and temporal resolution. Nature Methods. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0640-3

Hoyos P, Kim N and Kastner S (2019) How Is Magnetic Resonance Imaging Used to Learn About the Brain?. Front. Young Minds. 7:86. doi: 10.3389/frym.2019.00086
Kakalios, J. (2017). The Physics of Everyday Things. New York: Crown Publishers. 

Khan Academy. (n.d.a). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Retrieved from 
https://www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/mcat/physical-processes/proton-nuclear-magnetic-resonance/a/magnetic-resonance-imaging-mri

Marshall, J., & Hadskis, M. (2009). Canadian Research Ethics Boards, MRI Research Risks, and MRI Risk Classification. IRB: Ethics & Human Research, 31(4), 9-15. Retrieved from www.jstor.org/stable/25594880

Nowogrodzki, A. (2018). The World's Strongest MRI Machines are Pushing Imaging to New Limits. Retrieved from www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-07182-7

Straten, V. C. (2013). The Hip Resurfacing Handbook. Woodhead Publishing Series in Biomaterials. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857096203.2.242
